Pelag Ha'Minḥa is defined as the latter half of the time span between מנחה קטנה until the end of the day (ערב), occurring at 10¾ hours into the day (Berakhot Bavli 26b). Since מנחה קטנה begins at 9½ hours into the day, this leaves only 1¼ seasonal hours from the start of this half until the end of the מנחה. It is during this time that one may start performing a select few commandments of the night, such as accepting Shabbat early (Shulḥan Arukh O"Ḥ, 273:4), lighting Ḥanukah candles early (footnotes of Ḥazon Ovadia Ḥanukah pg. 89) or praying תפילת ערבית when one (preferably) already prayed Minḥa (Berakhoth 26a, Rabbi Yehuda).

---

The Gemara's central inquiry concerns whether the "half" is measured from מנחה גדולה or מנחה קטנה; once the _beraita_ clarifies it is the latter, the Gemara proceeds to calculate the day's span assuming a 12-hour daytime period, and פלג המנחה happening within those 12-hours. It identifies that מנחה קטנה is the 9½'th hour of the day, then leaving this "half" (פלג המנחה) to start at "11 minus a quarter hours". This implies that the two halves of מנחה קטנה are equal, placing ערב at the 12th hour—after both halves have elapsed. However, the Gemara does not explicitly define ערב, leaving it to the Rishonim to associate it either with sunset or nightfall.

The calculation of seasonal hours from sunrise to sunset aligns with the sacrificial schedule, particularly the כבש של בין הערבים (afternoon lamb offering), which parallels the מנחה prayer. This is per the proof of Rabbenu Ḥananel (citing R' Yehuda's parallel's between the rules of the שתי תמידים and when one can pray the two daytime prayers). Thus, פלג המנחה is placed 1¼ seasonal hours before sunset (as held by Talmideh Rabbenu Yonah, Berakhoth Bavli 26a; Rambam, Laws of Prayer, 3:4; Shilteh Hagiborim on the Mordekhi; R' Yitzḥak Yisraeli's explanation of the Meiri - Yoseh Binah pg. 105).

However, other authorities defined the day as starting from Dawn and ending by Nightfall, thus defining ערב (being the end-time of מנחה) as Nightfall (as writes the Rosh on Berakhot 1:1 & 4:6; Tosafot Ha'Rosh on Berakhot 27a; Rashba on Berakhot 2a). The questions on the specific implementations comes from the origin of said definition (Pesaḥim Bavli 94a) and how it's structured there:

- The Gemara in Pesaḥim extended the day proportionally, where the same 4 mil that was used to start the day is the same 4 mil that was used to end the day. One approach is to assume the seasonal hours get extended to match this new length (as ruled by the Terumat Ha'Deshen; see siman 1), thus keeping halachic midday corresponding with the sun's midpoint in its traversal (as explicitly outlined by Shu"t Divreh Yosef Shwartz pg. 58 & R' Tukachinsky in the Sefer "Ben Hashmashot", pg. 98). Nevertheless, Pelag Ha'Minḥa is independent from proportionality (as discussed in Pri Ḥadash, Kuntress Debei Shimsha, end of ספר מים חיים), hence allowing either one of those rules to be broken. This opened the door for two preceding interpretations:
- By ignoring the extended length of a seasonal hour but still keeping a proportionate Nightfall (thus being 72 minutes in both directions), the S"A & Ramban (in addition to Ra'ah, Berakhoth 26b; Ritva, Berakhoth 27b; Rabbi Yaakov Emden, Prozdor Bayit 41, paragraph 28 explicitly linking this to Shabbat's Candle Lighting) created a time for פלג המנחה that was close enough to sunset to make both terms used interchangeably (see the Ramban, Pesaḥim 54b; as for the S"A, see O"Ḥ 233 for Nightfall being the end time of מנחה as well as O"Ḥ 261 describing what Nightfall is, and the connection between sunset for Tosefet Shabbat to פלג המנחה, as the Rama implicitly outlines).
- Contemporary authorities, however, extended the length of each seasonal hour but defined Nightfall using the 13.5 seasonal minutes measurements, disproportionate to the 72 seasonal minutes added for Dawn (see the Ben Ish Ḥai, Year I, Vayakhel VIII; see also Ohr Letzion vol. 2 pg. 147 & the responsas of the Ma'amar Mordechai vol. 4 siman 12). This meant that the 6<sup>th</sup> seasonal hour no longer corresponded to the midpoint of the sun's traversal.

This is all a build up to the opinions of Yabi'a Omer (handwritten notes on Yabi'a Omer I O"Ḥ 43:20) and his two sons - R' Avraham Yosef in his [Parashat Terumah 5779 shiur min 3:55](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/76371) as well as R Yitzḥak Yosef in multiple shiurim ([Motzei Shabbat Pesach 5779 shiur min 37](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/81670), [Motzei Shabbat Bo 5778 shiur min 25](https://torahanytime.com/lectures/55391)) & his Yalkut Yosef (new edition, siman 271, pages 139 & 144-147) - to use the Geonic Nightfall as an offset for Pelag, in both stringencies (such as by blessings in vain regarding ערבית and הדלקת נרות), but _also in its leniencies_ (such as the last time to eat _Seudat Shelishit_ on Erev Pesaḥ - see Ḥ"'O Pesaḥ pg. 67 & pg. 199). This is also reflected in later writings of Maran zt'l himself (Ḥazon 'Ovadia Ta'anit pg. 94; Halikhot 'Olam vol. 1 pg. 223), even if he's not made mention of it by earlier sections of how seasonal hours work (Halikhot Olam, vol. 1 pg. 248). The questions on this position do not come from its specifications in the books, since the Sefarim were vague in terms of a resulting time; rather, the questions come from the implementation in the Ohr Hachaim calendar, which fills in blanks that the sefarim did not specify (often times from the direction of Hakham Ovadia himself). In that calendar, they ignore _both_ the proportionality of the day when defining Nightfall _and_ the use of those extended seasonal minutes. Furthermore, this calculation is _isolated_ to פלג המנחה; other zemanim in the calendar are all consistent with the time range from sunrise to sunset. Nevertheless, we've used the implementation of the Ohr Hachaim calendar when representing the "Yalkut Yosef" opinion, due to its authoritative status in representing the calculations from the sefarim.

In contrast, R' David Yosef (אוצרות יוסף תשובה ז בסוף הלכה ברורה חלק י"ד) advocates restoring פלג המנחה's definition as 1¼ seasonal hours before sunset, as per the original Sepharadic tradition. In addition to the questions raised on the Yabi'a Omer's position above, there is no concern about going against the stricter ruling for matters of blessings (effectively being everything that can be done from פלג המנחה), since precedents in a blessing override concerns about them (source: מנחת כהן, מעמר ב, בסוף פרק ט. This is also applicable for the latest time to say the blessings of קריאת שמע, where we are not concerned for the MG"A seasonal hour calculation). However, the Halacha Berura also allows praying מנחה after sunset; although this would be fine if it was reserved as a בדיעבד ruling, the Halacha Berura relies on this time enough that one should prefer this time for minyan instead of praying alone before sunset, even though he wouldn't use it as a reliability for the calculation of פלג המנחה.

Each of the differing opinions introduce its stringencies, but also leniencies. Combining that reason with a general concern of either adhering to the text or intellectual honesty with the structure for the day (both brothers respectively) introduces the two opinions without any room for compromising (irrespective of Halacha Berurah Siman 233 pg. 75 saying the Yalkut Yosef opinion). Therefore, we've presented both opinions with equal weight. However, by knowing the stringencies, one can adhere to both opinions, especially by restricting Biblical obligations with its blessings (such as קידוש בליל שבת or הבדלה מוקדם ביום שבת) to the stricter/later פלג המנחה, based on the Halikhot 'Olam (vol. 1 pg. 248) who attributed Biblical matters to the extended seasonal hours.
- There are opinions that would argue that ערבית, what they assert as the first prayer of "the day", would fulfill the Biblical obligation to prayer and thus be subject to the same recommendation. Nevertheless, the Kaf Ha'Ḥayyim (O"Ḥ 233:7) asserts that we are lenient regarding prayer to use the time represented in our calendar as the Halacha Berura time (which we can thus extend to anything needing a blessing - the "stringency" of this ruling - based the position of the מנחת כהן), even if he rules in other cases would indicate that פלג המנחה should be based on Nightfall (O"Ḥ 692:29). As for the second concern, there are others who assume שחרית is the Biblically-mandated prayer (ראה בפרי מגדים סי' ד' מש"ז ס"ק טס), especially in light of the opinion that ערבית is a תפילת רשות in the Gemara's perspective.
- The "later time" for the Rabbinic/Biblical divide above would depend on whether you demand proportionality (as the Halacha Berura does) or don't (as the Yalkut Yosef does). However, interesting to note that the only authority that considered the Nightfall position (the Yalkut Yosef) is also the one that doesn't demand proportionality. Thus, one could use the ילקוט יוסף time above to be exempt according to both opinions; should it prove to be too strict (which may happen in northern countries), one should calculate the seasonal hours from Dawn to the Geonic Nightfall and use the 10.75<sup>th</sup> hour instead of our listed time, which should result in a time closer to the Halacha Berura time. As for the difference of "צאת הכוכבים" between this implementation of the MG"A hours and the morning ones (those being by קריאת שמע and both times for חמץ בערב פסח), perhaps we're not concerned about proportionality since this form of calculation is already a stringency for us, and the proportionate time would increase the stringency on the assumption (that Nightfall is 72 minutes) we do not rule by.

---

Fun fact: Under Biblical Hebrew rules of "קטל", the proper pronunciation of פלג המנחה should transliterate to "Peleg Ha'Minḥa". Nevertheless, we've kept it "Pelag" to adhere to Hakham Ovadia's pronunciation style.