Tekufot are the Halachic equivalents of the yearly seasons, which we have four of yearly; Nissan/Spring, Tammuz/Summer, Tishri/Fall & Tevet/Winter. These are based on the solar year, due to being astronomical in nature.

- There is a Kabalistic warning not to drink water during the time of the Tekufah switch itself, as written down by the Rama (Yoreh De'ah 116:5, see Meam Loez Genesis 9:7). Although the Djerban minhag was to extend this for an hour and a half prior and following this time (רמ"ך בברית כהונה - חלק אורח חיים מערכת ת' אותיות כ"א-כ"ה), Maran zt"l writes (Halichot Olam, Chelek 7, Page 183) one need only wait one third of that time (half an hour following and prior)
- 60 days after Tekufat Tishri, outside of Israel, we switch the text of the Shemoneh Esreh's 9th Beracha (ברך עלינו). In the Gregorian calendar, this matches to December 4th or December 5th.

---

To determine when the next Tekufah is, get the known date of the previous Tekufah and add the length of the year divided by the amount of seasons (4). The length of a year, according to Shemuel in Bavli Eruvin, 56a, is a rounded up version of the astronomical length of a year, for the sake of being easier to keep track of (Hazon Ish - OC Siman 138, se’if katan 4). Thereby, since his length of a year is 365.25 days, dividing it by 4 gives us 91 days, 7 hours and 30 minutes.

A further Makhloket is whether the first Tekufah used a fixed clock time of 12:00 PM or used local Israel Ḥatzot. Although the Ohr Hachaim calendar uses the fixed clock time like Rav Tuchanski does in his calendar, the תנובות שדה (Rav Aharon Boron) takes issue with this due to the arbitrary nature of a 12:00 midpoint. As such, the עמודי הוראה calendar (as well with the unofficial לוח ילקוט יוסף) uses the local Israel Ḥatzot time of 11:39 AM, which is only a -21 minute difference. For the water warning above, it is possible to accommodate both by starting from half an hour before R Boron's time and finishing half an hour after the time listed in the Ohr Hachaim calendar.